hello, and welcome to another walkthrough of computer architecture for everybody this is a
walkthrough of our VLSI design layout tool, very large scale integration, the tool where we sort of
build circuits by painting layers that turn into photolithography although it's probably these days
laser lithography but you get the idea the basic idea is you can draw these pure areas that are
going to have metal placed on them you can also erase them and it doesn't really matter how you
place them as long as you erase them and put them together you can end up with quite weird shapes
i'll put some positive voltage in one area and you see the positive voltage goes wherever the
metal is even though the way i drew it was i drew a piece then i chopped a piece out of it etc etc
so let me clear this all out and let me work on a not gate because a not gate is is a pretty good
and simple way to understand how this works so you could take a look at the image from the lecture
and paint exactly the thing it does and that's a good good thing to do but i'm going to do it a
little differently i'm going to start from the transistors outward and so i'm going to start
with the the pMOS transistor at the top so i'm going to have a vertical bit of p-doped silicon
and then i'm going to make a vertical piece of n-doped silicon and then i'm going to take some
polysilicon and run across because where the intersection happens between a p-silicon and
n-doped and a p-silicon and a p-doped that's where transistors happen so at these two intersections
there are transistors okay and so if we take a look at the layers we can see because there's
always this layer viewer then there is an n-MOS transistor that is created so we now have oh
i gotta erase that you can just erase stuff if you mess it up so now what we got to do is we
got to get some electricity to these so we got to draw the rest of the circuit okay so the first
thing i'm going to do is i'm going to draw the output and that's going to be a bit of metal
bit of metal so i overlap the metal with the p-diffusion and the n-diffusion now if i take
a look at the layers you see that where i overlap the metal and the p-diffusion there's still a gap
and where i met the end diffusion and the metal there's still a gap if i want to actually connect
them together i have to explicitly connect them together so i am going to do that by punching
a via it's like drilling a little hole and then pouring i don't know metal into it but so now what
we have is we have the p-diffusion overlapping the metal and the end diffusion overlapping the
metal but now there's a little connector that goes down through the center so we are working
in three dimensions here they're all kind of layered on top of one another but then we want
to connect the layers away we go okay so now i want to actually make some input so i'm going
to take the input these two polysilicons and then i'll just drop a little input out here a little
bit and so the polysilicon and the metal do not touch until i punch a via there so i punch a little
hole punch a little hole and away we go and then the next thing i want to do is i want to have a
place to get the output so i'll pull a little bit of metal out here metal touching metal doesn't need
a via so we're pretty much almost done at this point if we put some voltage up here in the orange
in the p-dope silicon and we put some ground at the bottom in the n-dope silicon what you see is
that the voltage is flowing but because there's no voltage on the transistor the transistor ends up
being a block to the whole thing okay so if you recall the p-moss is open on ground and closed on
positive and the n-moss is the opposite where it is closed on ground and opened on positive so let's
just go ahead and put some voltage in i probably should have done that so now you see the transistor
in operation so i've got voltage on the input and that is causing the upper p-moss transition
to block voltage from flowing so voltage would come into the p-moss transistor but not leave
the transistor if we then look at the n-moss transistor in the bottom you see the ground is
flowing up but in this case it's flowing through the n-moss transistor to the output and so the
output is negative now if we switch and put ground as the input which we do like that then you see
that the p-moss at the top is conducting and the plus is going all the way out to the output oops
i just put a ground there that messes that thing up and but i can fix that watch i can just say
erase come back come back i just hovered and hit it so i erased that guy so now it's back to being
a happy little not gate okay so that's a happy little not gate um let's go ahead and turn this
in for our assignment it tells you to place a probe with a label a on the input to your not gate
so there's a thing called a probe and we're going to replace this ground with input a and it says
place a probe with a label q on the output so we got a and q so now i think we're in good shape
we already built the not gate and we tested it so let's just go ahead and start the grading
so it checks to see if there's an a and a q probe and we named them correctly doesn't know we may
have him in the wrong place we're set a to ground and check to see if the output is vcc which is
right that's the first half of the knot now it checks sets a to vcc and then set checks to see
if the q is ground and that's correct and so we are done and we have earned our grade in that so
before i stop here a couple other things to show you there is this really cool feature called
read circuit and i'm gonna press it and then just stay quiet draw vcc eight one draw probe a at four
six with voltage vcc draw p plus diffusion from eight one two eight five draw polysilicon from
six three two ten three draw polysilicon from six nine two ten nine draw metal from six three two
six nine draw metal from eight five two eight seven draw metal from four six two six six draw metal from
eight six two eleven six draw via six three draw via eight five draw via eight seven draw via six
nine draw probe a at four six with voltage vcc draw probe q at eleven six with voltage zero
draw n plus diffusion from eight seven two eight twelve draw gnd at eight twelve so that's pretty
cool there's also a way for you to load and save this is going to use um space on your on your
browser this is using what's called browser local storage so i'll just call this one not two
and so if you look and do load you could reload to not two so i'll just leave that for a bit
the one last thing i will show you is there is this command line and so you can type
you can type commands here i'm going to say draw metal from two comma two to ten comma ten
this is going to ruin my circuit but you'll get the idea so that just drew the metal and so i
messed up my whole circuit but you can see that you could place these things so if i started over
from scratch i could type draw draw poly silicon from three comma six to ten comma six see so you
could draw all those things that's actually what the save and the restore actually knows all of
those items so there's some help for this that you might find useful talks a lot about how to
do stuff it gives you hints as to how to complete your homework etc so i hope you found this
interesting this walkthrough on the vlsi design system for computer architecture for everybody